## 1. Theory
We model captured audio as a discrete-time signal $x[n]$ given by $$x[n] = s[n]+W[n]$$where $s[n]$ is the ENF signal and $W[n]$ is i.i.d. zero-mean white Gaussian noise with power $\sigma^2$. Additionally $s[n],W[n]$ are assumed to be independent.
### 1.1 ENF Signal Representation
Electric Networks produce frequencies as a harmonic functions, where the Electric Network Frequency (ENF) fluctuates in time, due to interference with for example other loads. These fluctuations are referred to as Instantaneous Frequencies (IF) and are the core to ENF Fingerprint Detection. We model the ENF Signal as $$ s[n] = A[n] \cos ( 2 \pi T f[n] + \phi) $$where $T$ is the sampling rate and $f[n]$ is the targeted frequency drift over time. The frequency drift fluctuates around the generator's frequency, which in Switzerland is 50Hz. The ENF can also be observed at multiple of 50Hz, where it has been shown to be strongest for 100Hz.
### 1.2 ENF Signal Enhancement
Since the Electric Network Frequencies are often buried in environmental noise, the essential part of this project is to enhance the ENF signal, i.e. increase the Signal-To-Noise Ratio defined as $\text{SNR} = 10\log \frac{\sum_n s^2[n]}{\sum_n v^2[n]}$ in decibel. In real-world applications, the SNR is usually between -20dB and -60dB.

As a first step, we apply a bandpass $H(z)$ to the audio data $x[n]$ to eliminate environmental noise outside a small range around 100Hz, say we bandlimit the signal to $[-99.5,100.5]$ Hz as the ENF variance is around 0.01 Hz, to get rid off all the audio content with significantly higher amplitudes than the ENF.$$y[n] = (x*h)[n]=(s*h)[n]+(W*h)[n] \approx A[n]\cos(2\pi T \sum_{i=0}^{n}f[i]+\phi)+(W*h)[n]$$due to the linearity of the convolution operator. Since we assume $s[n]$ to be entirely contained in the bandpass of $H(z)$, filtering it will leave it unaltered. The white noise $W[n]$ gets filtered by $H(z)$, which alters the Power Spectral Density. We denote $v[n] = (W*h)[n]$, with Power Spectral Density given by $S_v(e^{i\Omega}) = S_W(e^{i\Omega})|H(e^{i\Omega})|^2$. Which through IDTFT evaluates to $$\sigma_v^2 = E(v[k]^2) = \frac{1}{2\pi}\int_{-\pi}^{\pi} |H(e^{i\Omega})|^2\sigma^2d\Omega = \sigma^2 \left( \int_{-2\pi f_{max}/f_S}^{-2\pi f_{min}/f_S}d\Omega + \int_{2\pi f_{min}/f_S}^{2\pi f_{max}/f_S}d\Omega \right) = 2T(f_{max}-f_{min}) \sigma^2$$where $T = \frac{1}{fs}$ with $f_S$ being the sampling rate. 

This yields $$y[n] = s[n] + v[n]$$as the output to the bandpass.
### 1.3 IF Estimation
Usual frequency representations lack information about the time evolution of a frequency distribution. Consider a monocomponent FM signal given by $z[n] = e^{j\phi[n]}$. The instantaneous frequency (IF) is defined by $f_i[n] = \frac{\phi'[n]}{2\pi}$. Ideally, we would want our time-frequency distribution to follow a "knife-edge", i.e. we denote $\rho_z(t,f)$ as our time-frequency distribution, then $$\rho_z[n,f] = \delta(f-f_i[n])$$where $f_i[t]$ represents the IF of the Analytical signal $z[n]$. If we take the (inverse) Fourier Transform of both sides, we can reduce the condition to $$\arg(\mathcal{F}^{-1}_{f \rightarrow \tau}(\rho_z[n,f])) = f_i[n]$$we denote the term inside the argument as the signal kernel $K_z(t,\tau)$ given by $$K_z[n,\tau] = \mathcal{F}^{-1}_{f \rightarrow \tau}(\rho_z[t,f])$$where the ideal signal kernel is given by $$K_z[n,\tau] = \mathcal{F}^{-1}_{f \rightarrow \tau}( \delta(f-f_i[n])) = \exp(i2\pi f_i[n] \tau) = \exp(i\phi'[n]\tau)$$The idea is to encode the signal $y[n]$ as the IF of a monocomponent FM signal, i.e. $$z[n]=\exp(j2\pi T \alpha \sum_{i=0}^ny[n]) = \exp(j2\pi T \alpha \sum_{i=0}^ns[n]) \cdot \exp(j2\pi T \alpha \sum_{i=0}^nv[n]) = z_s[n]z_v[n]$$from which then the IF can be estimated as the "knife-edge" of the resulting time-frequency distribution. 

The scaling parameter $\alpha$ is chosen such that the encoded frequencies are not too high (Nyquist limit) or too low (hard to distinguish ENF from noise). A fitting value is $$\alpha = \frac{1}{4} \cdot \frac{f_S}{max|x[n]|}$$ where $f_S$ is still the sampling frequency. 
### 1.4 STFD calculation
We now assume that $A[i]$ is constant within an observing intervall to simplify the calculation of $z[n]$. This yields $$z_s[n] \approx \exp(j2\pi T \alpha \sum_{i=0}^n A \cos(2\pi T f + \phi)) $$
We now want to build the sinusoidal time-frequency-distribution (STFD) of z which then enables us to reconstruct the denoised signal using the STFD peaks. 

To create a usable kernel we need to approximate the derivative $\phi'[n]$. The approximation used here is $$\frac{\sum_{k=1}^q(\phi(t+c_k\tau)-\phi(t-c_k\tau))b_k}{\tau}$$ which allows for a precise derivation around a specific frequency based on the parameters chosen. This approximation then yields the Kernel $$K_z(t,\tau) = \prod_{k=1}^q (z(t+c_k\tau))^{b_k}(z^*(t - c_k\tau))^{b_k}$$
To further optimize this kernel for sinusoidal signals, we replace $c_k$ with a delay $\Delta_k$ yielding the following kernel:
$$K_z(t,\tau) = \prod_{k=1}^q (z(t+\tau + \Delta_k))^{b_k}(z^*(t - \tau - \Delta_k))^{b_k}$$
With the conditions for a STFD and $q = 2$ the parameters are defined as $$b_1 = f \tau \pi \sin(2\pi f \tau), $$ $$b_2 = f \tau \pi \cos(2\pi f \tau),$$ $$\Delta_1 = 0,$$ $$\Delta_2 = \frac{T}{4} = \frac{1}{4 f}$$
resulting in the final Kernel in discrete time $$K_z[n,\tau] = (z[n+\tau]z^*[n-\tau])^{Tf\tau \pi \sin(2\pi Tf\tau)}\cdot (z[n+\tau+\frac{f_S}{4f}]z^*[n-\tau-\frac{f_S}{4f}])^{Tf\tau \pi \cos(2\pi Tf\tau)}$$
We now define the STFD as $$STFD_z[n,k]=\sum_{i=0}^{\tau}K_z[n,i]\exp(\frac{-j2\pi ik}{N})$$
It can be shown that $$\sum_{i=0}^{\tau}\Theta(K_{z_v}[n,i]) = 0$$ and $$\sum_{i=0}^{\tau}\Theta(K_{z_s}[n,i]) = (\tau + 1)\tau \pi \alpha s[n]$$ which means that we can find the denoised signal $\hat{s}[n]$ with $$\hat{s}[n] = \frac{\sum_{i=0}^{\tau} \Theta(K_z[n,i])}{(\tau + 1)\tau \pi \alpha}$$ without having to the expensive calculation of finding the peaks in the STFD.

Since the kernel itself is calculated using the instantaneous frequency f (constant within analysis window), we now approximate the true IF's iteratively by starting with a nominal value (e.g. 100Hz) and improving until proper precision is achieved. 